---
layout: post
title: Why Jaynes's book "The Logic of Science" is wonderful
---

I am still diligently working through E.T. Jaynes' book (Probability Theory:
The Logic of Science) and the content keeps astonishing me. Just when I think
that I got the most out of his book, this "thousand-year-old vampire" (Jaynes)
presents me with yet another awe-inspiring chapter. There are also two meta
things I learned from the book:

* One doesn't need complex, abstract maths for arriving at far-reaching
results. Jaynes' ability to investigate the hell out of a subject using only
simple equations[^1], plain English (as opposed to set-theoretic) formulations
with a wealth of references across various fields spanning work developed
throughout several centuries is incredibly remarkable and such analysis is a
breath of fresh air. Jaynes waded through original manuscripts of famous
mathematicians, read their correspondence with peers and understood in depth
their view-points. There's an entire history-of-maths book hidden inside this
gem, but not full of irrelevant trivia, full of the ways grand mathematicians
tackled problems that are still important today.

* We are teaching Statistics wrong. Mathematicians taking stats courses across
universities proudly declare that they hate stats shortly after dabbling in it.
I don't blame them: right now we teach stats as a bunch of vaguely related
techniques and often say "use your own judgement" when people ask which
technique really is appropriate for the task at hand. Except mathematicians
don't want to use their judgement: that's why they like maths after all. They
want a bunch of rules to follow to arrive at the conclusion. Turns out such
rules have existed for the last 30-60 years, but we kept them hidden from "the
mainstream". As for the field of Statistics, it really isn't that different to
maths as one can derive all the important results from just a few axioms.

[^1]: which don't always have simple solutions, but Jaynes tackles them with
      well-established techniques rather than clever tricks

