---
layout: post
title: Are aspiring rationalists narrow-minded?
---

Exactly the opposite. And the testament is this idea, that one should be
willing to be persuaded to do *anything* as long as there is a logical argument
behind it is expounded in Eliezer's book ("From AI to Zombies"). Even if that
argument is "theoretical", "crazy", "philosophical", not "intuitive", "feels
wrong" and "leads to a narrow-minded conclusion"[^1]. (Roko's Bazilik was all
about just that - rationalists *scared* of finding a harmful valid argument, so
decided to not publicise it).

Therefore, you could, in theory, convince a rationalist of anything. But not
via the usual polemic arguments which have little to do with a scientific
method (but have a lot to do with the way human brain has evolved). Evolution
didn't intend to make us scientists and that's why we had dark ages and that's
why we had enlightenment and that's why it took us so long to get where we are
today via a painful path of history full of very dark patches. Because
scientific thinking is not intuitive and, therefore, is not convincing.
Rationality isn't for winning arguments though - that's not even a worthy goal.

So narrow-mindedness is in the *methods*, i.e. methods of rationality, which is
just a scientific method applied to every day thinking. Creationists claim that
scientists are narrow-minded too. Scientists' job is to find most plausible
explanations for the data at hand: of course they are narrow-minded, they
*can't* possible accept a theory which is contradicted by the data. It is
exactly this kind of constraint that is self-imposed by rationalists on
themselves: they can't accept your "nothing is wrong with your argument, but I
am going to do it my way anyway". Because this is narrow-mindedness. If you are
set out to do whatever it *feels right to do* no matter how well people explain
it to you to just not do it, *you* are narrow-minded. And if you were dead-set
on doing it your way without picking argumentation of your opponent apart, then
why are you even involved in this conversation? Why do you even want to hear
opinions of others if such opinions have no power? Save yourself the hassle and
just do it. No need for consulting or debating.

[^1]: the conclusion that argument leads to has nothing to do with its validity
      in 99.99% of the cases. This is a terrible way to do science. However
      there a *few* "exceptions", see corrupted hardware post by Eliezer for
      details, but roughly if your argument concludes that you should start a
      genocide - chances are it's a result of corrupted, human thinking, even
      if you can't see the flaw, so you shouldn't do it.
