---
layout: post
title: How to make your Facebook awesome?
---

In 2013 Facebook hired Yann LeCun, the inventor of convolutional neural
networks at Bell Labs in 1988. Such neural networks recently won the ImageNet
Competition. Basically the guy is awesome and he's been at making FB less dull
since 2013.

So whilst LeCun is busy making your timeline more relevant to you, here's how
you can train his algorithm:

* Subscribe to stuff which is of interest to you. For example: BBC news,
Guardian and Financial Times regularly post something of interest.

* Find people that are awesome and follow them. Awesome people share
thought-provoking posts, write interesting blog posts and express their
informative options often backing them up with reasoning. And their arguments
are not some kind of [sarcastic remarks][sarcasm] of cosmic stupidity. Start by
following just one awesome person and then you'll see them interacting with
others. Follow those others too.

* Find societies where awesome people hang out and join those groups.

* Hide stuff which is uninteresting, mundane and dull.

------------

And now my Facebook is awesome. No, Mark Zuckerberg, you got it all wrong. And
Twitter got it all right: I don't actually care all that much about people
whose trace in space-time crossed mine. Just because I went to school with you
I have no interest in how you partied hard last night. I need food for thought
and thus I prefer to follow people who share *my interests*, not my geo
location.

Now why don't I just use Twitter, you may ask. Because the idea of 140
characters puts me off - I might one day overcome this barrier, but not yet.
It's because of you, Twitter, people share text as screenshots and that is
just horrible. Die, 140 limit, die, die, die!


--------

Isn't it all just [creating a bubble][bubble]? Yes it is. However, the people
I follow are quite contrarian *even amongst themselves*. Critical thinking
applied to critical thinking. And not [for the sake of it][sake], for the sake
of trying to be right.

[bubble]: http://econlog.econlib.org/archives/2013/04/make_your_own_b.html
[sake]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/2pv/intellectual_hipsters_and_metacontrarianism/
[sarcasm]: http://mindsarentmagic.org/2014/09/13/never-be-sarcastic/
