---
layout: post
title: How I Learned To Stop Worrying And Love The Brexit
---

With more and more facebook posts on the subject matter I gauge that people are
*worried*. Here's why I am not worried. And here's how you could be not
worried either.

**1)** Embrace the fact you live in an echo chamber. 99.9% of the people you
choose to engage with with already agree with you: you are *not* achieving your
goal, you are just collecting likes! Your thoughtful and informative arguments
will fall on deaf ears. You *almost certainly* underestimate this effect. The
actual maths behind the strength of your echo bubble has been eloquently
explained in the quote below:

> ...What I mean is – well, take creationists. According to Gallup polls, about
> 46% of Americans are creationists. Not just in the sense of believing God
> helped guide evolution. I mean they think evolution is a vile atheist lie and
> God created humans exactly as they exist right now. That’s half the country.
>
> And I don’t have a single one of those people in my social circle. It’s not
> because I’m deliberately avoiding them; I’m pretty live-and-let-live
> politically, I wouldn’t ostracize someone just for some weird beliefs. And
> yet, even though I probably know about a hundred fifty people, I am pretty
> confident that not one of them is creationist. Odds of this happening by
> chance? 1/2^150 = 1/10^45 = approximately the chance of picking a particular
> atom if you are randomly selecting among all the atoms on Earth.
>
> -- <cite>Scott Alexander, [I Can Tolerate Anything Except The Outgroup][out]</cite>

**2)** Even if you managed to reach out to a person who doesn't agree with you -
you won't be able to persuade him/her.

The way we jump to conclusions has very little to do with reasoning. Face it,
the remain campaign has always made so much more sense to you - even though you
probably didn't go through a very detailed cost-benefit analysis involving a
myriad of numbers and highly speculative scenarios. And even if you did - you
shouldn't have. Because you are not impartial. You would find the remain side
more compelling anyway, because that's what you expect to find:

> Rosenthal is well known for his research on experimenter expectancy effects,
> the influence that a researcher can exert on the outcome of a research
> investigation. Perhaps the most famous case of an experimenter expectancy
> effect is the case of Clever Hans (as discussed earlier in class). Rosenthal
> and Fode (1963) attempted to demonstrate this phenomenon in the context of
> controlled laboratory research. In one of his early experiments, he tested
> the effects of experimenter expectancy on maze-running performance. He had
> two groups of students test rats, wrongly informing them either that the rats
> were specially bred to be "maze dull" or "maze bright." In reality, all rats
> were standard lab rats, and were randomly assigned to the "dull" and "bright"
> conditions. The results showed that the rats labeled as "bright" learned the
> mazes more quickly than those labeled as "dull." Apparently, students had
> unconsciously influenced the performance of their rats, depending on what
> they had been told. Rosenthal reasoned that a similar effect might occur with
> teachers' expectations of student performance.
>
> -- <cite>[Introductory Psychology][psy]</cite>

**3)** Down with reasoning! You can persuade by appealing to emotion:
by ridiculing the other side, by arguing that your enemies are
stupid/racist/chauvinistic and just downright evil ([they are not][not_evil]). Oh and don't forget to
mention Putin. Whilst you can, the opposing team **will** deploy exact same
tactics against your side and we'll be perpetually stuck drowning in vomit of
disgusting arguments. See any political debate ever - not only such a form of
persuasion has been shown to be to have very temporal effects on the recipients
but also leaves a bad taste in everyone's mouth and ruins your credibility (and
your day!).

**4)** Don't worry about polls saying the referendum will be a close one: trust
odd checkers instead. Media has long been exploiting the fact that articles that
cause strong dividing reaction are much more likely to spread. And across
various polls conducted in this country - you will only hear about those that
show that the referendum will be a close one. Those will get your blood
boiling! But the only reason it has reached you is because it got someone
else's blood boiling too. Read more about this phenomena at [The Taxoplasma Of
Rage][rage].

Bookmakers, however, have skin in the game. They aren't going to lose money
just to stoke up some controversy. And guess what: remain is winning by a [large
margin][odds]. So time to relax and argue about the dragons in game of thrones.

Related: [prediction markets](http://squid314.livejournal.com/352406.html)

**5)** Brexit or not - face it, you have very little control over the final
decision. It's counterproductive to get emotionally involved in things you have
no control over. See the following excellent quote by Bryan Caplan:

> Stop paying attention to things that aggravate you unless (a) they
> concretely affect your life AND (b) you can realistically do something
> about them.  Start by ceasing to follow national and world news.
> -- <cite>Bryan Caplan, [Make Your Own Bubble in 10 Easy Steps][bub]</cite>

I wrote a [blog post][fin] last year how your vote has very little to
contribute, so you don't have (b).

**6)** Don't think that your facebook posts are better than nothing. There
*are* better ways to make a difference. Off the top of my head: reading up on
persuasion tactics, donating to an effective campaign, persuading a figure of
importance to speak out, talking to relatives... Your facebook posts just have
"trying to try" written all over it, a concept explained below:

> Want to try to make a million dollars?  Buy a lottery ticket.  Your odds of
> winning may not be very good, but you did try, and trying was what you
> wanted.  In fact, you tried your best, since you only had one dollar left
> after buying lunch.  Maximizing the odds of goal achievement using available
> resources: is this not intelligence?
>
> ... if all you want is to "maximize the probability of success using
> available resources", then that's the easiest thing in the world to convince
> yourself you've done.  The very first plan you hit upon, will serve quite
> well as "maximizing"—if necessary, you can generate an inferior alternative
> to prove its optimality.  And any tiny resource that you care to put in, will
> be what is "available".  Remember to congratulate yourself on putting in 100%
> of it!
>
> -- <cite>Eliezer Yudkowski, [Trying To Try][trying]</cite>

If that wasn't clear, read more [here][trying] for more unclarity. In other
words you are starting to sound like one of those wannabes who went to X-factor
and performed a song "giving your all" on stage instead of enrolling on singing
lessons a priori.

So yeah - aren't those dragons pretty cool?

[out]: http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/09/30/i-can-tolerate-anything-except-the-outgroup/
[psy]: http://psych.wisc.edu/braun/281/Intelligence/LabellingEffects.htm
[rage]: http://slatestarcodex.com/2014/12/17/the-toxoplasma-of-rage/
[bub]: http://econlog.econlib.org/archives/2013/04/make_your_own_b.html
[not_evil]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/i0/are_your_enemies_innately_evil/
[fin]: {% post_url 2015-04-10-voting %}
[odds]: http://www.oddschecker.com/politics/british-politics/eu-referendum/referendum-on-eu-membership-result
[trying]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/uh/trying_to_try/
