---
layout: post
title: Reflections on outcome of Brexit referendum
---

Democracy isn't about optimising for the best outcome short-term. It's about
giving people the sense of control of the political process in order to avoid
government overthrows, violence and instability. And as long as people believe
that politicians believe that their voices should be listened to - we enjoy
stable and, as a result, prosperous economy.

Prime and recent example of what happens when majority of the people no longer
believe that the government institutions are obeying the rules would be
Ukraine's political turmoil, "Euromaidan", in 2013 which resulted in the
president fleeing the country. Despite the president's term coming to an end,
many people didn't think that the upcoming election would be fair and they took
it upon themselves to overthrow the government.

Thus we should appreciate what Britain has: members of the parliament repeating
"people have spoken and should be heard" after the recent referendum. Despite
the fact that many MPs, I suspect, secretly keep the electorate in contempt.

And I largely agree with such "elitist" position that some opinions are not as
valid others. A person who voted based on factually incorrect information or
contrary to his/her own interest without realising it, of course, shouldn't be
listened to. And in some ideal world where people don't become disenfranchised
and don't try to riot and/or overthrow the government - I'd insist on not
listening to such voters.

A person who thoroughly researched the options and considered all with an open
mind and based the decision on the facts should be listened to.

But implementing a system which distinguishes between these two kind of people
could easily result in an authoritarian state where "factually correct opinion"
is, in fact, the most convenient opinion for the government in charge.

And thus, regretfully, I insist that Britain should now leave the EU. There
should be no second referendum, parliamentary block or any other act that comes
across as obviously disrespecting the will of the people - as the question on
the ballot was unambiguous, the turnout was high (higher than in latest general
elections - and if the referendum vote is somehow illegitimate - they why is
the current government legitimate?). Finally the majority won by a small yet
sizeable (>1 million) margin.

And people approaching the strength of the referendum from the "elitist"
position: who is to say that all Remain voters were well-informed and based
their decision on factually correct information?

However, all isn't lost. Leave and Remain could potentially come to a
compromise of Britain leaving the EU yet staying in the EEA. EEA would lead to
an access to the single market, free movement of labour, scientific
cooperation, participation in Erasmus programme, etc - i.e. things Remain
largely cares about. It would calm the markets down, Britain could avoid the
recession, keep its financial sector in London and keep Scotland united with
England.

It would be interpreted by some Leave voters as a betrayal of their wish - but
it wouldn't be. The EU ballot was about the EU and not about the EEA. Besides,
some Leave voters might be satisfied with such outcome, especially those who
weren't motivated by immigration in the first place, and some might just change
their mind by the time such arrangement is worked out.

I encourage Remain to come to terms with the outcome of the referendum and try
to make the best out of the situation instead of gleefully watching the country
tearing itself apart whilst smiling to themselves in "I told you so" moment,
wishing for the worst possible scenario to unravel as some sort of
self-inflicted punishment on the Leave camp.

Finally I'd like to come back to the point that MPs, secretly, hold the
electorate in contempt. I hold this belief because of the prevalence of poor
argumentation and outright lies politicians often resort to in order to achieve
their goals. Some of it comes from the politicians being "mind-killed"[^1] by
politics themselves (i.e. misled and confused yet utterly convinced). However,
some of it comes from them using selective quoting of experts, consistent
misrepresentation of facts and downright ad hominems (such as "racist") thrown
at political opponents. Needless to say, such tactics resulted in mistrust and
derision from the Leave camp. So yes I partially blame "I think people in this
country have had enough of experts" on Remain who resorted to such means in
order to persuade the public and received a "f*ck you" protest vote instead.

So let us all put on the "democracy is the worst form of government, except for
all the others" gloomy faces and push for the EEA arrangement with our improved
rhetoric.

[^1]: term used in [series of blog posts][lw] which I obviously recommend to
      anyone interested in having better political debates than typical ones

[lw]: https://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Politics_is_the_Mind-Killer
