---
layout: post
---

I decided to spent my day off tripping on MDMA. (How do spend your free time?).
OK, safety first: MDMA testing kit, check, micro scales, check. Also since it
was my first time I stayed at home so that I feel comfortable and have easy
access to facilities such as water and blankets. God I ended up needing the
latter quite a lot. So...

I take a carefully measured 100mg dose and continue to strum the guitar. The
day is sunny and I am about to become... euphoric. What could be better? Whilst
anticipating, I play loud chords... 20 minutes in, and my left hand starts to
feel strange... it is no longer my hand. It is a hand, but it is not MY HAND. I
control it as if it's a prosthetic hand though still. I am slowly starting to
leave this room in spirit. My body isn't my body anymore and everything has
become incredibility distant. "I am not present", I remark. "This drug is
weird", I remark further.

OK, since the drug is working, I am going to put some music on, ecstasy is good
for this, people say. I turn a cheery song on... and I actually love it. I feel
like I am the song for some time... but then it stops feeling this way. The
music is now very distant... and I am losing more of the self. I am leaving the
environment further.

I am starting to not enjoy this. "-How do you feel?", I receive a message. "I
don't know is my answer". Because I AM NOT HERE. However... I don't like the
drug. Really don't like it. People talk about unity. Yes my body is indeed
united with the room, but *I* have left *both*: the body and the room. I want
my body back. I want to feel connected to the Earth again. This is turning into
a nightmare. I realise that I've lost track of time.

I start to feel cold. I put on woolen socks, turn the heating up, grabbing my
top and my coat and a blanket. I curl up into a corner of a sofa. I really want
to be back. I don't want euphoria, just need to get back into this toy, foreign
room. I want the sounds to not sound distant and the body to feel normal again,
like MY BODY.

I CRAVE HUGS. I NEED human contact just to make myself feel normal and safe again.
I plea for hugs in an online chat. "Jesus, why is she taking so long to reply?
Please don't abandon me here! I NEED YOU, human. BRING ME BACK." Please, reply.
Please, reply. PLEASE REPLY. STAY HERE. Don't let be on my own. I need you.
Reply... faster... Don't leave me. I beg you to not abandon me here on my own.

Phone rings and her voice goes: "I guess you won't be taking this drug again,
hah?". I reply with "I am going to burn the rest. Jesus who THE FUCK enjoys
this shit?". And we talk... I try to make tea to feel warmer. I make a lot of
sounds with a teaspoon in the process... no, still distant. Her voice is really
soothing though. As we talk I slowly start to calm down and return. I have so
much gratitude towards her for keeping me company when I needed it so much. One
hour later, I am completely OK: present and not devastated. Thank God, I am
back.  Life's normal again. Fuck this drug.

I love presence now. I love being present in THIS REAL ROOM and feeling MY
BODY, MY HANDS, MY FINGERS: they belong to me.

On the bright side, I've experienced derealisation first-hand. I can emphasise
more with people who live with it. Oh, and don't do drugs.
