---
layout: post
title: Why I keep introducing myself as a proud PhD dropout.
---

For some time now I have been introducing myself as a proud PhD dropout at
various social events; especially at events where many PhD students are
present. I guess that's one way to connect with some of them. And hey, may be
it will make the borderline depressed ones feel a bit better.

Whilst being a PhD dropout is common, what's up with the "proud" part?  The
truth is dropping out was a really hard decision to make. I have been heavily
invested into mathematics by the time I found myself wondering why I am still
doing it. But the potential of dealing with future social repercussions was the
worst thing that I had to overcome. Repercussions such as explaining why I
dropped out at every single interview for the rest of my life.

The thing is, there is a bit of a stigma attached to people who have dropped
out. I think a lot of the stigma comes from academics themselves. After all,
many have also experienced such thoughts throughout their career but found a
way to cope with such thoughts. This is simply a survival bias: since *they*
found a way to cope, they expect *you* to follow their path. Of course, it's
hard to hear the perspective of other PhD dropouts when you live in such
bubble: as they are not as numerous.

Nowadays I associate my decision to just walk away with a) realising how little
I should care about societal expectations b) starting to figure out what my
personal motivations and goals are.

However a) is a massive load of my shoulders. So what's the story? How did I
come to even contemplate dropping out?

The short story is I threw myself at a problem, worked on it for almost a year,
solved it... and then got really disappointed by how insignificant the problem
was. I couldn't throw myself at another problem similar to the one I solved.
What do I mean by insignificant? Isn't it presumptuous to expect to make a
contribution right away? I didn't want the problem to be groundbreaking: but I
did believe in motivations why it was introduced to me as important. The truth
is I stopped believing those motivations. I tell myself that's what happened:
problem A is relevant to physics but hard. We introduced a problem B that was
not so relevant to physics but much easier to solve. Hope was that our methods
would help us with understanding how to solve A. Whilst I was working on B, A
got solved. Due to similarity of the problems I ported some methods from B to A:
but that was missing the entire point of it! Problem B should have been
dropped once A got solved. Needless to say, I couldn't carry on working on
various variations of B: I just lost interest.

When I lost any interest in researching more, I still told myself that I should
just finish: write it up and move on with my life. But deep down, I simply
didn't believe my reasons.

I'd say things like "hey, dropping out will affect my career negatively" - but
I was and still OK with that. I actually look forward to reasoning with my
interviewers about this thing; and if we can't see eye to eye on this issue -
then it's a good sign I don't want to work at such place. Needless to say, I am
currently employed at a place where I feel understood and people around me come
across as really reasonable. I guess my main argument against this specific
thought is: "many people don't even have a PhD; can you really penalise me for
trying to get one?".

Another thing that I would often tell myself was "now that you've come so far,
you should just do it because it is easy". Mind you though, this isn't sunk
cost fallacy. This is just saying that getting the title now is very easy: thus
it is rational to just grab it. Well, the problem I had with that is that I
lost any respect of the title: it was simply not worth it. Any minute of my
life invested into the thesis became a minute wasted to me. Again, my
"rebellious" streak reasoned with me: "you don't want to be surrounded by
people who are easily impressed by titles". The truth is, there isn't much to
the title: PhD program is really unstructured and getting one doesn't actually
signal all that much due to variability involved. Pursuing the title violated
my "substance of status" value.

Those were the main arguments that I kept mulling over: on my own and with my
colleagues. My colleagues often weren't particularly understanding either:
they'd present me with arguments that I already knew very well and be a bit
disappointed I wasn't convinced. But to convince a person, you have to present
them with new information, goddammit! And my colleagues went on and got their
titles; whilst I just dropped out. There was no thesis, no viva, no minor/major
corrections and no invigilators to worry about. Just like that, I freed myself
from the entire disorder and walked away towards a happy life.

Well, it wasn't just like that. Things got pretty bad. I remember cycling in to
the office, day in, day out, with an honest intention of actually doing some
work on the thesis. And every day making a decision not to. I thought it was
procrastination at the time, but the truth is deep-down I simply didn't think
it was worth it. Spending yet another minute of my life on it was something I
simply couldn't justify. But I kept trying. I remember those bleak, dark and
shitty days. I remember cycling home and thinking "what happened to me: how did
I become so unorganized?". And I remember one particular stark realisation when
I opened my notebook and realised that I didn't do any work for 2 months. For 2
months I was coming in to work, trying to do some work, giving up: distracting
myself with reading LessWrong/machine learning textbooks and going home with
nothing. I had one line of maths written in my workbook. ONE LINE.

Naturally, I perused all the scientific literature on procrastination and how
to work effectively; but none of the interventions would stick. The truth is it
wasn't procrastination, it wasn't learnt self helplessness. It was simply the
fact that I didn't believe my own arguments for why I should finish it.

One day it all clicked though. Such shitty existence is just not worth the
social recognition: I have one life to live. It was, of course, a series of
blog posts that helped cope. One particularly memorable one is called ["Taming
the Mammoth: Why You Should Stop Caring What Other People Think"][wbw] and it
is written by Tim Urban. And I remember sharing this with my friend and my
friend, who was never burdened by societal expectations, saying "what a waste
of time this blog post is". Well that was a disappointment: life-changing blog
post for me wasn't even worth reading. I see some humour in this failure to
connect today though.

A book that I am reading these days mentioned the following thing yesterday:
knowing that a person you admire also went through struggles similar to yours
will alleviate your suffering. And it helped me a lot when I found out that a
person I currently admire the most, [Julia Galef][galef][^1], also dropped out
from her PhD. And thus this blog post was born. I don't claim to be admired,
but I hope that some of my readers will also find comfort in the fact that I
struggled with this decision.

P.S. And I apologise to many of my colleagues who had to bear the brunt of my
irritability at the time of my struggles. In my defense, irritability is a sign
of depression.

[^1]: because of her Rationally Speaking podcast and her very human take on rationality.

[wbw]: https://waitbutwhy.com/2014/06/taming-mammoth-let-peoples-opinions-run-life.html
[galef]: https://juliagalef.com/
