---
layout: post
title: Thoughts on "The Charisma Myth" book
---

I finished yet another self-help (audio) book. I think I am supposed to show
some humility at this stage and remark how sceptical I should be of such books.
Well, let's just assume I've just done it and move on to a more interesting
part: discussion of the actual book.

The book is called "The Charisma Myth" and is written by Olivia Fox Cabane.
Olivia coaches business people who want to up their game (and become cool) and
has quite a good [intro video][vid] on her website.

The main thesis of the book that charisma is a learnable skill: most
charismatic people just happen to stumble upon the correct behaviours when they
grow up and get rewarded for them. And then she lists some studies to justify
this worldview: however she doesn't list that many. Anyway this worldview is
exactly what I needed to hear to start working on own my skills.

The surprising part of charisma training is the fact that "presence" is a big
part of it. Surprising because I originally associated impressive people with
charisma. Turns out charismatic people tend to make you feel
impressive/funny/interesting. And they do it by being fully present with you
when they interact with you. They listen to your stories and try to relive your
experience with you. Being fully present doesn't mean being fully oblivious to
the surroundings or pretending to be an active listener. It requires paying
full attention to the words spoken and also noticing the surroundings. For
example, if a loud laughter interrupts your conversation: remark on this and
then try to return to the conversation by telling the interlocutor "you were
saying...". When it comes to the listening part, you should try to get to the
bottom of the sentiment that is being said. Thinking about witty remarks,
irrelevant tangents and preparing a reply before a speaker is finished speaking -
all of it doesn't count as being fully present. Needless to say, thinking about
your worries or casually looking for a way out of a conversation are also
massive turn-offs.

The way I interpret all of the above is that I have to make a concious call
whether I am going to devote my full attention to the speaker and the situation
or not even bother. It is totally acceptable to excuse myself and leave the
conversation, but it is not acceptable to be only halfway in it. This means: no
glancing over my smartphone or mulling over my own worries whilst interacting:
I am either in or out. So far I have had great experience applying this
technique: I am discovering how real-life interactions are so full of various
subtleties. People's faces, voice intonations, body language: all of it is
so interesting to observe. It is actually a bit disappointing that some people
prefer to turn to chatting online via their smartphones during the social
events: they just don't appreciate the beauty of real-life display of emotions.

When I was reading the book I had one of those ["click!"][click] moments: one
of those moments when things start to make sense. A friend of mine[^1] confided
in me relatively recently. He told me he likes a girl because of who he is
around her. I could instantly relate to this. I am starting to suspect that he
makes an effort by being around her and she rewards him with laughter or
meaningful replies. Such constant rewards encourages him to be "on" and he
loves it. Appears if you want people to like you, you should make them feel
impressive; don't try to impress them.

Another interesting takeaway from the book is the importance of body language.
The content doesn't matter as much as delivery. If you want people to
appreciate a funny story that you are telling them, you have to relive it
yourself. Your body language, your voice intonations are impossible to control
consciously: there's just too much stuff to think about. However you can deploy
a visualisation technique, i.e. remember what it is like to be funny,
aspirational, etc if you want to grab people's attention. It starts to make
sense now that one of the most charismatic people I know is an actor. After
watching wonderful storytellers time and time again the only thing in common
I've picked up is how alive they are when they share their stories. Their faces
lit up, their hands move, their voice changes amplitude and pauses
appropriately. These observations spurred me on to take up improvisation
classes. I had my first class last week and I absolutely loved it.

The book then goes into into disambiguating charisma by identifying 4 types of
charisma. The author identified a type of charisma that inspires people
("visionary"), a type that makes people follow your orders ("authority"). Other
two are: focus and kindness. I described focus charisma above, however kindness
charisma is also worth remarking on. Kindness charisma makes you come across as
generous and well-meaning. It is especially important when you have to give
somebody a negative feedback, however it is incompatible with authority
charisma. Oh my god, I didn't even know that there are so many charismas!

The book finishes with remarking that there are certain downside to being
charismatic. People might start to envy you or feel like you are taking credit
for their work. Then strategies on how one should deal with such situations are
offered. The book is also full of interesting exercises. Overall I was really
impressed by it and I recommend it wholeheartedly. I am finishing this post
quite abruptly because I literally must run!

[^1]: Seriously no me this time. I promise.

[click]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/1mh/that_magical_click/

[vid]: http://foxcabane.com/
