---
layout: post
title: Would you rather be right or nice?
---

Would you rather be in an environment where people value being "nice" or being
right? And why is this a dilemma?

I will tell you why I think this is a dilemma for me and my current way of
resolving it.

Just like many others, when I was growing up I got indoctrinated with norms of
behaviours around other people. This includes basics things like personal
hygiene and wearing appropriate clothes. More sophisticated things like
fulfilling my promises and suppressing my anger were also taught to me. When I
say indoctrinated I mean these behaviours have become automatic and they were
often taught to me implicitly rather than explicitly. Shame was often involved
in making sure I comply. I was given strong incentives to act appropriately: I
promptly realised that being nice around my friends is the best way of actually
keeping them. I was discouraged from acting inappropriately: it would never get
me things that I actually wanted.

And I believe this is the underlying reason why societies develop social norms
and strongly encourage everyone to stick to them. This way everyone is chill
and can have a pleasant environment around them. The norms might be somewhat
suboptimal on an individual level: some individuals aren't very sensitive to
certain things, whilst others are. Perhaps people without a good ability to
smell would put less emphasis on making sure everyone is clean[^1].  However,
on average, i.e. picking two individuals at random, they are both better off
sticking the social norms on their first encounter.

One very important thing to note of complying with social norms is that it is a
reciprocal affair. People who don't comply with the norms often are treated
badly: they are more likely to be ignored, shamed and harassed compared to
"well-respected" people. This is a tragic situation, but not the main point of
this blog post.

OK, so we are all encouraged to be nice, hopefully there's no big revelation
here. What does it have to do with being right?

Well, in many cultures, being proven wrong can result in shame and a loss of
your status, the very status that entitles you to be treated well as I remarked
earlier. If you consistently lie about your motivations and deploy motivated
reasoning to get what you want, eventually the society will no longer grant you
the audience. This makes total sense to me. However trusting the society to be
the judge of the arguments that you deploy is a risky business. There's a line
of reasoning that humans developed argumentation in order to persuade their
tribe members and, as a result, are often poor when it comes to arriving at
accurate predictions. Regardless, the public can be a harsh judge.  And, we,
humans, can also be irrationally scared of the public being a harsh judge.
Being proven wrong can have bad consequences and often feels not nice. This
encourages a social norm of avoiding unnecessary discourse and creating "time
and place" for such conversations to happen (e.g. many workplaces insist people
go to a pub for having non-work related arguments).

OK, great, so being right is somewhat in conflict with being nice, in certain
situations. What is particularly aggravating, is that for any culture, there's
a counter-culture. Just like people without an ability to smell might develop
its own social norms, some nerds (or some people with autism) might develop a
different peculiar counter-culture.

Welcome to the social norms of LessWrong and related blogoshpere, or otherwise
known as a rationality community, for want of a better word. They developed a
culture where an honest debate is a way to gain status, and dishonest debate is
a way to lose status. However honesty isn't the only dimension of judgement: it
is how accurate an argument is. Is it free of confirmation bias? Does it really
the model the reality well? What about this case that your arguments don't
explain so well?  But, ultimately, if you are arguing in good faith: you are
willing to learn when people point out to you that your arguments are weak,
people will continue to engage with you. If they detect trolling, unwillingness
to learn about common biases, they will terminate the engagement. If you don't
like it, just leave: it is not a community for you. Ultimately, aspiring
rationalist are ostensibly attracted to modelling the world as accurately as
they possibly can. I say ostensibly, because of course we are only human.
People occasionally give in to their perverse incentives: desire to mock,
desire to troll, desire to come across as insightful at the expense of hurting
people. Rationality community is far from perfect.

How do they handle this right vs nice dilemma? Well first of all, not great.
Newcomers are often put off. However they do have some tools to communicate
displeasure. Certain subjects are considered ["mind-killers"][mind-killer]:
they are actively discouraged for the sake of staying chill.  Ultimately
though, there is an understanding that any social rule is not strictly
necessary. People can debate the rules and establish new ones if needs be.
People are free to say that this topic of discussion is making them upset and
disengage.

---------------------

OK, perfect, we have a description of two social norms and the conflict.
Whilst the majority of the people stabilises on "avoid argumentation and be
nice" a bunch of somewhat autistic internet nerd stabilises on "avoid poor
argumentation (and may be stay nice, but that's less important)", where poor is
defined by their own standards. When these two groups try to impose different
norms on one another they start to rub each other the wrong way: nerds can feel
frustrated when they are not given reasons that they think are valid, whilst
the rest of the society can perceive the nerds as overly argumentative and
unpleasant.

And that would be OK if the two groups never had to interact but they do,
especially in the tech industry. My realisation today is that the tech industry
is especially attractive to "let's learn how to model the world better" crowd
as opposed to "why can't we all just get alone nicely" crowd. A lot of it is
because tech is itself a counter-culture to the well-established, but
god-awful-boring corporate working environment. Suits is a particularly
well-fitting observation point. By complying with a dress code, you are
indicating obedience. You are effectively saying "I am willing to wear a suit
even though it has no direct bearing on the outcome of my work; this
indicates that I am willing to be bossed around and comply with further
requests without _being given good reasons_". Not being giving good reasons, is,
of course, what some of the aforementioned nerds viscerally hate. Another
salient point is the love affair tech industry has with flat hierarchy: of
course if people give you reasons why you should do what needs to be done, then
there is no need for managers to give people orders. Perhaps an emphasis on
flexible working hours can also be fitted into this thinking: fixed working
hours appear to be more about signalling obedience rather than actually doing
work.

["The Soul of a New Machine"][book] describes how a culture with a heavy focus
on being right and a de-emphasised focus on being nice emerges in tech. Many
arguments between software engineers can be reduced to empiricism: "You think
your algorithm is faster than mine? Well let's just not argue about it and test
it instead!". Also, tech industry has a higher proportion of autistic people
than many other fields of work, and this might be feeding in into the spread of
the "being right" culture.

However another important realisation that I made today is that not everyone in
tech is so keen on this counterculture. Of course everyone doesn't want to wear
a suit and likes the idea of flat hierarchy and flexible working hours, but
some are in tech for different reasons to being surround by people who value
being right: may be they just like coding. May be something else.  They are so
many reasons why "indoctrinated" people might end up working alongside
"argumentative" nerds. Nevertheless, they feel like their opinions should still
be heard without them needing to read a [2000-page primer][ai] on human
reasoning and "correct" argumentation.

---------------------

So far, we have at least two distinct groups with different social norms in a
perpetual and, possibly, poignant conflict. Is there a way out?

Yes! If you are more on the "I care about being right"-spectrum, then you need
to create correct [incentives][incentives] for people to engage with you.
Listen empathetically, try to "feel the argument" from another point of view.
Encourage the colleagues to tell you their reasons why they think a certain
course of action is the best. Shooting done those reasons, even if you feel
like those reasons are Argumentation 101, should be down with extreme care. Try
to disentangle egos as much as possible from a debate. You need to convince
colleagues that this is just some abstract debate, not a way to deflate their
ego; you will not use win/defeat in this debate to your advantage in the
future. You can't just assume people already know that because they don't.

A piece of advice for "nice" people: understand that by not engaging in a
debate, you are fuelling frustration. Understand that simply presenting your
reasons isn't sufficient, it is necessary to engage in a counter reasoning and
counter-counter reasoning further. Understand that you both, most likely, want
the same outcome, but disagree on how to achieve this outcome in a way that is
best.  Try to reduce arguments to empiricism as much as possible.
Understand that a discourse is not a waste of time: a belligerent colleague
might become your best ally if you manage to convince them: 30 minutes of
arguing is well-worth avoiding 5 hours of resolving merge conflicts because a
lack of conversation has killed collaboration and communication.

Further reading: [Personhood: A Game for Two or More Players][personhood].

[^1]: I didn't think that showering daily is paramount until I realised that
      the sense of smell is extremely unevenly distributed across people. You might
      not sense the body odours, but other people might: and some of them will avoid you.

[mind-killer]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/gw/politics_is_the_mindkiller/
[book]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Soul_of_a_New_Machine
[ai]: https://intelligence.org/rationality-ai-zombies/
[incentives]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/cu2/the_power_of_reinforcement/
[personhood]: http://www.meltingasphalt.com/personhood-a-game-for-two-or-more-players/
