---
layout: post
title: Do we need more mathematicians? Rant number 1 from a maths PhD dropout.
---

After skimming yet another article on how important the field of mathematics is
even if maths graduates don't end up mathematicians because it develops
abstract reasoning, because it's used in a variety of fields, because it is
fundamentally similar to many types of intellectual activities, e.g. software
engineering and many others I must write this. I have heard this narrative
before. I have heard way too much about this narrative. I've been listening to
how maths is unfairly unpopular, how the world needs more maths graduates
etc... for about 3 years from maths PhD students in my ex-PhD office. The
narrative usually ends with that we should fund mathematics more, promote maths
more, because maths = underrated good.

Boy, where do I even begin the rant that is about to follow...

At this point I started to suspect that there's a secret paper somewhere that
examined the causal effect of graduating in maths on improved reasoning skills,
concluded that such effect indeed exists with some overwhelmingly small
p-value, then it was spread amongst all vocal mathematicians all around the
globe who secretly read it, memorised, and agreed to never speak about the
existence of such paper ever again. However, by the looks of it, I wasn't
included.

And even if I accept the premise that there exists a causal effect of studying
maths on doing overall better in life, before I start advocating that we need
more maths graduates, I still need to know

1) Cost/benefit analysis of pushing someone through a 3-4 year degree designed
by archaic methods of education in order to achieve the desired effect. Perhaps
people without the "improved abstract reasoning" skill don't earn as much
indeed, but, considering the cost of acquiring a degree, they are still better
off, financially, over the course of their careers.

2) An argument that maths degree uniquely achieves the desired effect. For
example, say Joe got the impression that maths degree is useless, acquired a CS
degree, still developed the "improved abstract reasoning" skill, and, in
addition, found a job as a programmer in no time, compared to say,
mathematicians who tried finding jobs in software for months. So Joe is still
financially better off. Shouldn't mathematicians, in the face of this scenario,
back down and say we need more people in STEM except maths degrees?

3) An argument that out of the all possible ways of achieving the desired
"improved abstract reasoning" effect, the most effective way is to push some
people via a maths degree and that those people are currently put off from
doing maths for a variety of silly reasons that we can easily address. Going
back to Joe, perhaps after reading all about degrees he got put off all
together, found a job as a programmer straight after school, yet still
developed the "abstract reasoning" skill on the job, and he's now considerably
more financially better off than his colleagues with maths degrees.

*(In all of the above examples I took earnings as some measure of the desired
outcome because it is easy to reason about. However the points would still
stand if I took many other measures.)*

But before I get carried away but the more nuisance points 1-3, the fact that
people advocating more maths graduates don't even acknowledge that the
causality of the beneficial effects of maths degree needs to be established for
their points to hold, they are in "not even wrong" category.

Of course maths degrees attract clever people and those people, especially
those that manage to graduate, do relatively well in life. Is that really an
argument for more people having maths degrees?

The moment you translate this reasoning into a more medical setting, you
realise how absurd it is. If a depressed individual starts solving sudoku
puzzles and eventually gets out of the depression (like most of the depressed
people do) it is infinitely erroneous for them to start pushing others
depressed individuals into solving the sudoku puzzles. No, sudoku puzzles don't
treat depression. Fact.

Relevant to not considering the counterfactuals is another line of reasoning
that is equally irritating to me (*don't mind me fuming...*). People who look
back on their lives, see mistakes they have made and say that they have no
regrets: it's *those mistakes* that made them who they are today, they say.

Excuse me... that's equivalent to just saying you can never make mistakes. This
devalues the entire decision process since whatever you decide to do now is
valid because this will make future you whoever future you will be in the
future.

So when people admit that may be doing maths degree wasn't the best way of
achieving "improved abstract reasoning" but they don't regret picking maths as
a degree anyway and other people should still pursue maths degree even if
alternative paths of achieving the claimed benefits exist because they did it
this way... You might as well claim it's axiomatic at this point. "More people
should do maths". QED.

And this point I need to branch out my ran into subrants and, hopefully, I can
stop branching and ranting at some point.

Subrant number one: maths degrees are pretty awful at actually teaching maths
(this point stands across fields). Generally, there's this problem that most
academics that teach classes don't have the incentives to teach classes well.
Specifically in maths, however, another damaging idea amongst academics took
place. The idea that students should be able to reason about maths without
resorting to real-world heuristics. Professors insist, that students should be
comfortable jiggling abstract definitions about without actually worrying too
much about the physical reality that such definitions often represent. I
believe that this thinking is inherited from the attempt to axiomise
mathematics and decouple it from physics. Not only such thinking is damaging to
educating about the field, it is also completely misleading about how
mathematicians actually conduct research. No, they don't operate on abstract
definitions in their heads until a proof emerges. They have very good
intuitions about what the symbols they operate on represent physically, and
only once they see their intuition pointing towards a particular direction,
they worry about the technical details of the proofs.

Just today I watched the intuitive explanation of linear algebra series on
youtube by [3Blue1Brown][youtube]. Not only it made me think "god why didn't
they teach it this way to me", I also realised how terribly inefficient the
teaching was. 6 months course got covered in ~1h videos and with a better
outcome.

Subrant number two: why is it only mathematicians that seem to care about the
issue? Is it that case that they

1) Examined various ways they could improve the humanity, figured out that
maths degrees getting unpopular is a serious problem and decided to pour their
efforts into advocacy of the field after doing some analysis about pouring
their efforts into somewhere else.

or

2) They just happen to like maths, they get together with other people who
happen to like maths, and they talk about the world that doesn't seem to be as keen
on liking maths as much as they do, and about how they should do something
about it and they all agree with each because they are in the echo-chamber
pre-selected on the principle that they all like maths.

I put my money on 2), and, as a result, that no analysis on which causes are
more severe than others has been done by the advocates.

This assumes that the social advocacy is a limited resort. And I insist that it
is. Not only individuals are limited in the amount of time and money that they
have, they also are limited in the amount of social capital that they have.

Couldn't this argument be applied to every cause? Well... almost every cause.
There's something suspicious when I hear about cyclists advocating for more
cycling lanes (do they just like to cycle or do they know it's a cost-effective
way of lowering healthcare costs?).

However I fail to apply this criticisms to a) global warming. From my
understanding many people who are advocates won't necessarily be directly
affected, but they realise that it is an important cause regardless. b)
effective altruism. The whole premise of effective altruism is to care about
the most cost-effective way of making the world a better place. c) (some)
vegetarianism. I can't directly see how going vegetarian benefits you unless
you really really care about animals (as opposed to lowering greenhouse gas
emissions).

This is *not* to say that every cause that seem to only benefit people that
argue for the cause is somehow flawed. But I will continue to raise my eyebrow
wondering whether the advocates did any kind of comparisons with other causes
at all.

------------------

I will be writing more about my experience as a maths PhD and the reasons I
haven't finished, so the theme is to be continued...

See also:

* [SSC on the value of education][ed]
* [Why using number theory as an example of useful pure maths is not compelling][num]


[youtube]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZHQObOWTQDPD3MizzM2xVFitgF8hE_ab
[ed]: https://slatestarcodex.com/2014/05/23/ssc-gives-a-graduation-speech/
[num]: {% post_url 2015-09-17-number-theory  %}
