---
layout: post
title: Thoughts on "The Hungry Brain" book
---

I just finished reading [The Hungry Brain][amazon], and, boy, what a
fascinating read!

The book, apart from providing instrumentally useful advice on how to improving
your dieting habits, also explains relevant neuroscience topics in a very clear
and illustrative way. It's the kind of book that I just had to read in 3-4
sittings because I wanted to learn more and more about the brain and about the
countless number of very interesting mice and rat studies

So what's the TL;DR; of the book what things should I record so that I can
revisit this notes later? What follows is my loose interpretation of the book.

"Calories in, Calories Out model" is the underlying mechanism of how people
gain and lose weight. However it doesn't explain the obesity epidemic: it just
explains how it is happening, not why. By understanding the why, however, we
might be able to improve our waistlines without obsessive calorie counting.

The underlying point of the book is that our waistlines have been ballooning
since about 1970s and common explanations of the phenomena are too superficial.
Sedantary lifestyles? Sure, but they had been sedentary way before 1970s.

So why is it happening then? Dopamine and habit-forming loop. If you eat
rewarding foods you will get "addicted" the same way other habits are formed.
You will start eating just for the pleasure of enjoying food and not because
you are hungry.

This part of the book explains dopamine very well. I always associated dopamine
with pleasure. I was wrong. Dopamine is a *reward* chemical. High
levels of dopamine in your brain makes you more impulsive: because it is easier
to get rewarded for spontaneous actions. Think about weed and being high. Low
levels of dopamine, on the contrary, make you lethargic and apathetic.

The main thesis of the book, is that modern, Western food industry, has figured
out a way to make food a) exceptionally rewarding b) incredibly not-satiating.

Both factors make such food very difficult to resist eating. Moreover, the more
you succumb to temptations, the more your body will demand such foods.

And the way to deal with all of this? The way addicts deal with addictions!
Which is to: "STEP AWAY FROM THE SNACKS: Don't make it too easy for yourself to
eat food throughout the day". Here I praise the book for making me realise the
importance of creating an environment void of triggers when you are dealing
with an addiction.

For example, want to start drinking less alcohol? Just don't buy it, don't keep
in the fridge and, possibly, don't have spare cash so that you can't buy from
next door. (I am yet to decide whether I want to implement this).

But one thing that I have already implemented: I stopped buying foods that I
find exceptionally rewarding (cookies). I will now try to convince work to
follow my lead: they are quite keen on providing all of us with snacks, which
isn't great of our collective waistlines.

Another interesting trivia is about how little it takes to actually become
overweight with time. The difference between lean people and overweight is
about 10%  excess calorie intake a day. Which is, you know, a couple of Kinder
Buenos (or some Oreos).

The book goes into much more neurological justification of why we tend to
find modern, refined foods exceptionally rewarding and not satiating. And why
eating refined, delicious and tempting food makes you to eat more of it later.
These are all empirical statements and they are all backed by numerous rat
studies. But I won't be recollecting these here.

But more practical tips follow: eat foods that are high on satiety index. In
other words, eat food that makes you feel full per calorie eaten.  Potato is
one of those superfoods that is not full of nutrition, but is also quite high
on such index. This explains why people who implement "potato-only" diets are
typically very successful. However if you don't want to just eat potato all the
time, google for satiety index. Protein is also exceptionally high on such
index, so look for ways to replace fat/carbohydrates with protein in your diet.
This is another piece of evidence explaining why, empirically, Paleo diets seem
to work better than low-fat diets.

Food that is high in satiety index tends to be simple and not refined.
Beans, fish, some vegetables, a steak. Complete opposite of french fries,
Doritos, cookies, pizza. You know what I am talking about.

Another way of decreasing a reward from food is to decrease variety. A
practical tips for visiting buffets follows: a) avoid them b) if you find
yourself in a buffet, choose 4 kinds of dishes that you will consume out of the
selection and allow yourself to only eat these. Variety is just another way of
making food more rewarding and almost impossible to stop gorging on.

And yet another way of making the temptations easier to pass by is a technique
of visualising yourself in the future. This simple trick makes your
present-you value your future-you more.

Finally, not getting enough sleep makes you more prone to impulsiveness. This
often leads to making short-term rewarding decisions (ordering a pizza) over
long-term rewarding decisions (going to the gym). So, yeah, get enough sleep,
dah. Another one, closely related thing, is stress. Avoid comfort eating and
substitute comfort eating with a taking warm bath, going for a jog, having a
yoga session instead if you want to make yourself feel better right now.

So where does it all leave us? If you want to lose some weight you should
identify what patterns of behaviours cause you to overeat the most. Is it
availability of snacks? Bad sleeping habits? Lack of exercise? Comfort eating?

Once you identify the biggest weaknesses in your current lifestyle, make
appropriate adjustments. Let the knowledge of the [Habit Forming Loop][habbit]
guide your way.

If you are intrigued about the book and want to know more then read [this
review][review] or listen to [this podcast][podcast].

---------------------------

The long story short, controlling the pleasure you derive from food is yet
another tool that you should consider when you are implementing a diet.
Calculating calories and exercising is another tool. Cutting off sugars is yet
another instrument at your disposal, albeit related. Fasting is yet another one.

Moreover, people who go on calorie-restriction diets are, empirically, less
successful, than those who change diets completely, as outlined by the book.
After all, there's a [monkey][monkey] inside all of us, which is difficult to
control.

Anecdotally, after I changed my eating habits away from rewarding foods (and stopped
having cookies lying around) I lost 3 kilograms. It is not an enormous amount,
but I love how effortless it was. I didn't realise that I was losing weight: I
simply wasn't hungry.

[amazon]: https://www.amazon.co.uk/Hungry-Brain-Outsmarting-Instincts-Overeat/dp/125008119X
[habbit]: https://www.amazon.com/Power-Habit-What-Life-Business/dp/081298160X
[review]: http://slatestarcodex.com/2017/04/25/book-review-the-hungry-brain/
[podcast]: http://rationallyspeakingpodcast.org/show/rs-189-stephan-guyenet-on-what-causes-obesity.html
[monkey]: https://waitbutwhy.com/2013/10/why-procrastinators-procrastinate.html
