---
layout: post
---

I spent two days reading "Come As You Are" book by Emily Nagoski recently. And
this is how I felt when I was reading it: "OMG OMG OMG, where have I been all
this time?". First of, this is a book about sex. Feminine sexuality,
specifically.

The book starts off by addressing insecurities of many women. It goes into
extraordinary lengths to convince readers that their bodies are normal. The
effort of the author, a sex educator, puts in into this showed to me how
insecure and ashamed women are about their bodies and genitalia. It then
quickly remarks on the myth that hymen is an indicator of virginity. OK... but
nothing mind-blowing.

The mind-blowing things start in Chapter 2, where the author introduces the
dual control model. Sexual response is governed by two systems: *Sexual
Excitation System (SES)* and *Sexual Inhibition System (SIS)*. SES is the
accelerator: it receives information about sexually relevant stimuli in the
environment, such as smell, touch, taste or imagination, and sends signals from
the brain to the genitals to tell them "Turn on!". It is a subconscious system
that is always at work. SIS is the sexual brake. Things like risk of STI
transmission, unwanted pregnancy, social consequences or... your grandmother
walking into the room activate it. The implications of this dual control model
are immense. If you are having troubles getting aroused, you need to identify
whether your accelerator is too unexcitable or your brake is too sensitive.  If
your brake is too sensitive then things need to be just right for you to get in
the mood and if your accelerator is too insensitive then you will only respond
to specific stimuli. Apparently hormone levels don't actually affect the
sensitivity of neither SES nor SIS. Also, a sensitive brake is the strongest
predictor of sexual problems of all kinds. And... women tend to have more
sensitive brakes compared to men. Men, on the other hand, have more excitable
accelerators.  Which explain a lot! It should help men understand how to turn
women on in their bedrooms: be more mindful about their SIS.

Further the book introduces the idea of *context*. The idea of context is best
understood through tickling. Being tickled can be enjoyable if you trust the
person who is tickling you yet downright torturous if you don't. Same
sensations, different context. Another example can be: watching your partner do
laundry. If you feel overall supported and connected, then seeing your partner
doing the laundry may act as a cue for erotic thought. However, if you are
feeling resentful because you've been doing a disproportionate amount of the
laundry lately, then seeing your partner do laundry may feel satisfying - "it's
about time" - without feeling sexy. This *context* idea explains why it is
sometimes difficult to recreate some passionate nights between couples: the
expectation to have sex may ruin the *context*.

The concepts of *enjoying*, *expecting* and *eagerness* systems are explained
in the book. The *enjoying* system is responsible for the reward of the
experience, the *expecting* process is linking what's happening now and what
should happen next; whereas *eagerness* is the intensity of the emotion. These
three can apply to any emotion, however the book obviously discusses those in
the context of sex. *Expecting* system explains why certain people might get
aroused even when it is inappropriate to do so (e.g. witnessing an assault);
*eagerness* explains why certain people enjoy make-up sex a lot: eagerness is
high after the feeling of losing your partner. What is also interesting is that
stress can increase eagerness for some people but decrease it for others. And
how you can be expecting sex but not enjoying it; you can also be eager to have
sex but not enjoy it.

Further down "Come As You Are" (yes, I know it's a Nirvana song, goddamit!)
introduces a very important concept of... nonconcoradance. And TL;DR; of
nonconcoradance is that genital sexual arousal is often not in line with that
of the brain's. AND IT IS ALSO EXTREMELY COMMON, ESPECIALLY IN WOMEN. A dry
vulva yet turned-on brain isn't a sign of brokenness: simply get some lube. It
is significantly less common in guys, however it is still present.

Then the book differentiates between two types of desires: spontaneous and
responsive. Spontaneous desire is when you want sex out of the blue whereas
responsive is when you only want sex when something erotic is already
happening. Spontaneous desires are much more common in guys compared to women
and only about 15% of women have spontaneous desire. I *personally* used to
have spontaneous desire that morphed into a responsive desire only. These days I
only get turned on when there's an intention on somebody's part to actually
turn me on. Watching erotic material/porn has become incredibly dull.

The book then goes into discussion of feminine orgasms and how hard they are to
achieve during vaginal sex and finishes up with its persistent "YOU'RE NORMAL"
message to make readers feel more secure and good about themselves.

I thoroughly recommend this book to anyone who is interested in having a more
satisfying sex life (assuming they have a partner rather than just a blog!).
